.de Sh
.br
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.               \" Path Name
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de PN
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR\\$2
.el \fI\\$1\fP\\$2
..
.		\" The following macros added by dpwe for Ultrix 4..
.               \" Manual section reference
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de MS
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR(\\$2)\\$3
.el \fI\\$1\fP(\\$2)\\$3
..
.de EX		\" Begin Example
.ie \\n(.$ .nr EX \\$1n
.el \{\
.	ie n .nr EX 0n
.	el .nr EX 0n
.\}
.in +\\n(EXu
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
.nf
.CW
.ft CB
..
.de EE		\" End example
.in -\\n(EXu
.fi
.}f             \" restore basic text attributes
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
..
.TH audIO 3 "1997 feb 06" dpwe   \" $Header: /u/drspeech/repos/dpwelib/audIO.man,v 1.2 1997/03/11 20:30:38 dpwe Exp $
.SH NAME
audIO - portable interface layer for sound input/output hardware.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <audIO.h>\fR

AUSTRUCT \fI*\fBAUOpen\fR(int \fIformat\fR, double \fIsrate\fR, int \fIchans\fR, long \fIdesbuf\fR, int \fImode\fR);
void	\fBAUClose\fR(AUSTRUCT *\fIau\fR, int \fInow\fR);
long	\fBAURead\fR(AUSTRUCT *\fIau\fR, void *\fIbuf\fR, long \fIframes\fR);
long	\fBAUWrite\fR(AUSTRUCT *\fIau\fR, void *\fIbuf\fR, long \fIframes\fR);
long	\fBAUBufConts\fR(AUSTRUCT *\fIau\fR);
long	\fBAUBufSpace\fR(AUSTRUCT *\fIau\fR);
long	\fBAUDroppedFrames\fR(AUSTRUCT *\fIau\fR);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.PN audIO
library provides a portable way to write programs that use the sound 
input and output facilities available on many workstations.  A single 
functional interface can be used in applications, which will then run 
on any architecture for which a back-end has been written.  Supported 
platforms include SGI Indigo, SUN Sparcstations, DEC Alpha and Linux OSS.  
.SH USAGE
An opaque \f4AUSTRUCT\f1 is created by \fBAUOpen\fR which establishes a 
link to the audio hardware, and configures it for the sampling rate and 
channel count requested.  Where hardware cannot support the requested 
data characteristics directly, the library may provide on-the-fly 
translation, or it may return a NULL pointer indicating failure.  
Otherwise, a pointer to the \f4AUSTRUCT\f1 is returned which is used 
to refer to the channel in all the other calls.  The \f4format\f1 
argument to \fBAUOpen\fR specifies the representation used 
for the samples pointed 
to by the \f4buf\f1 arguments to \fBAURead\fR and \fBAUWrite\fR, 
and takes one of the \f4AFMT_\f1 codes defined 
in \f4audIO.h\f1, which mirror the \f4SFMT_\f1 codes used in 
.MS sndf 3 .
\f4mode\f1 is either \f4AIO_INPUT\f1 or \f4AIO_OUTPUT\f1 for record 
or playback operations respectively.  \f4desbuf\f1 requests the number of 
sample frames (one sample for each channel) that the hardware should 
buffer.  Smaller values give less delay through the audio hardware, but 
increase the risk of buffer under or overruns.  Passing a \f4desbuf\f1 of 
zero selects a default value for the platform.  Not all implementations 
permit buffer size specification.
.P
When a sound operation is complete, \fBAUClose\fR releases the audio 
hardware and destroys the \f4AUSTRUCT\f1.  If the \f4now\f1 argument is 
nonzero, a port opened for output will be closed as soon as possible, 
otherwise any samples buffered for output will be played before closing 
the port.
.P
\fBAUWrite\fR and \fBAURead\fR are used to supply and obtain samples to and 
from the hardware respectively.  The actual number of sample frames 
transferred is returned, which will be zero on error.  \fBAURead\fR may 
only be used on ports opened with mode \f4AIO_INPUT\f1, and \fBAUWrite\fR 
may only be used on ports opened with mode \f4AIO_OUTPUT\f1.  The format of 
the data pointed to by \f4buf\f1 is determined by the \f4format\f1 
argument passed to \fBAUOpen\fR.
.P
\fBAUBufConts\fR is used in conjunction with an output port to read how 
many frames remain in the output buffer waiting to be written out.  Where 
supported, this can be used for synchronization.  However, some platforms 
allow only very crude estimation of output buffer contents, if at all.
.P
\fBAUBufSpace\fR is the corresponding call for use in input ports, and 
returns the number of sample frames remaining before the input buffer 
becomes full (and overruns occur).
.P
\fBAUDroppedFrames\fR will return the cumulative count of sample frames 
dropped through overrun or underrun, where such information can be 
obtained from the system.

.SH IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
The SGI interface (which translates the calls into AL calls) supports 
all the features - buffer sizing, buffer space reading and dropped-frame 
count.  
.P
The Sun interface limits the buffer size to 2000 frames, since 
the system appears to hang for larger values.  \fBAUBufConts\fR and 
\fBAUBufSpace\fR are implemented, but operate very coarsely and may not 
be accurate.  \fBAUDroppedFrames\fR returns a very approximate number, 
but it will increase as more buffer over/underruns occur.
.P
The DEC wmm interface ignores buffer size requests and never reports any 
dropped frames.  The buffer size calls do return information, but quantized 
at one quarter of the total buffer space (which is 16 kBytes).  Since the 
DEC mmeserver tends to crash if it is repeatedly opened and closed by a 
single application, calls to AUClose do not actually release the port, but 
hold it open to be re-used by subsequent calls to AUOpen.  This means that 
attempting to reopen the audio port with new configurations is unlikely to 
work.  It's possible that the audio interface is improved in newer 
releases of DEC OSF, but I've had no motivation to rewrite the code.
.P
The Linux/OSS interface ignores the requested buffer size (except for its 
internal translation buffer) and currently returns -1 for both buffer space 
requests.  \fBAUDroppedSamples\fR always returns zero.

.SH BUGS
Not all features (for instance, reading remaining buffer space) are actually 
supported by all platforms.
.P
Some platforms provide translation for unsupported data types (such as 
\f4AFMT_FLOAT\f1), whereas others provide on-the-fly translation.  In any 
case, there is no way for a client application to query the hardware to 
find out which data types, channel counts and sample sizes are handled 
most efficiently.
.P
The interpretation of the the \f4bufsize\f1 parameter is a little murky.

.SH SEE ALSO
.MS sndf 3 ,
.MS snd 3 .
.SH AUTHOR
Dan Ellis, 
.B dpwe@icsi.berkeley.edu
