.de Sh
.br
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.               \" Path Name
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de PN
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR\\$2
.el \fI\\$1\fP\\$2
..
.		\" The following macros added by dpwe for Ultrix 4..
.               \" Manual section reference
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de MS
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR(\\$2)\\$3
.el \fI\\$1\fP(\\$2)\\$3
..
.de EX		\" Begin Example
.ie \\n(.$ .nr EX \\$1n
.el \{\
.	ie n .nr EX 0n
.	el .nr EX 0n
.\}
.in +\\n(EXu
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
.nf
.CW
.ft CB
..
.de EE		\" End example
.in -\\n(EXu
.fi
.}f             \" restore basic text attributes
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
..
.TH cle 3 "1997jul24" dpwe   \" $Header: /u/drspeech/repos/dpwelib/cle.man,v 1.5 2005/03/16 00:23:11 dpwe Exp $
.SH NAME
cle \- command-line interface utility functions.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <dpwelib/cle.h>\fR

void \fBcleUsage\fR(CLE_ENTRY *\fIentries\fR, char *\fIprogramName\fR);
int \fBcleSetDefaults\fR(CLE_ENTRY *\fIentries\fR);
int \fBcleHandleArgs\fR(CLE_ENTRY *\fIentries\fR, int \fIargc\fR, char *\fIargv\fR[]);
int \fBcleExtractArgs\fR(CLE_ENTRY *\fIentries\fR, int* \fIpargc\fR, char *\fIargv\fR[], int \fInoExtraArgs\fR);

.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.PN cle
library provides functions to simplify providing a 'standard' Unix 
command line interface ("-key arg ...") to programs.  It has the following features:
.TP 4
- 
a table provides for specification of argument keys, types and usage messages 
in a single location.
.TP 4
- 
allows multiple-character keys (e.g. "-infile foo") with selectable minimum 
match length (e.g. accept "-inf foo" but not "-in foo").
.TP 4
- 
automatic mapping of symbolic arguments to integer values via a table 
(to permit "-alg std" rather than "-alg 0").
.TP 4
- 
single-character keys may be run together with their args and with 
non-argument taking flags (thus "-v -d 5" is the same as "-vd5")
.TP 4
- 
support for keys that do not begin with "-".
.TP 4
- 
callback hook for more complex argument mappings.
.P
When using the 
.PN cle
library, the command line interface is defined by a table of 
\f4CLE_ENTRY\f1 structures, with the following form:
.RS
.LP
.ta .5i +2.5i +.5i
.nf
.ft 3
.\"typedef struct {    /\(** a command line entry \(**/
	char *flag;	/\(** e.g. "-n" or "-r|--ras?ta" \(**/
	int  type;	/\(** CLE_T_INT, CLE_T_FLOAT ... \(**/
	char *usage;	/\(** usage message for this entry \(**/
	char *deflt;	/\(** text for default value \(**/
	void *where;	/\(** address of variable to set \(**/
	cleSpecialSetFn specialfn;	/\(** fn to call for _T_SPEC \(**/
	void *specData;	/\(** extra data e.g. token table \(**/
.\"} CLE_ENTRY;.ft
.fi
.RE
.LP
The \f4flag\f1 string defines the actual key, including any prefix 
character; if the first character is "-", special treatment such as 
permitting single-character-agglomeration is enabled.  
Acceptable truncations of flags may be 
indicated by including a '?' in the string after the minimum 
prefix, and 
alternate versions for the same flag may be separated by a '|' character, 
(both as for the \f4CLE_TOKEN\f1 strings described below).
The \f4usage\f1 string defines the purpose 
of the flag, and is used, in conjunction with the \f4flag\f1 and 
\f4type\f1 fields to build the overall usage message.  \f4deflt\f1 is the 
default value for the argument, specified as a string that will be 
subjected to the conversions implied by the flag \f4type\f1 (or NULL to 
prevent setting a default value).  
The \f4type\f1 field defines the type of the 
argument which is pointed to by \f4where\f1, and must be one of the 
following keys defined in \f4cle.h\f1:
.ta .5i +1.5i +.5i
.nf
	\f4CLE_T_INT\f1	argument is an int
	\f4CLE_T_LONG\f1	argument is a long int
	\f4CLE_T_FLOAT\f1	argument is a float
	\f4CLE_T_TIME\f1	argument is a time in [[hh:]mm:]ss.sss format
	\f4CLE_T_STRING\f1	string value of argument copied directly
	\f4CLE_T_BOOL\f1	flag takes no argument and increments an int
	\f4CLE_T_INVBOOL\f1	flag takes no argument and decrements an int
	\f4CLE_T_TOKEN\f1	argument is mapped to an int via a table
	\f4CLE_T_SPECIAL\f1	argument is passed to a callback
	\f4CLE_T_USAGE\f1	dummy, for adding text to usage message
	\f4CLE_T_END\f1	marker for end of CLE_ENTRY table
.fi
.LP
Note that \f4CLE_T_BOOL\f1 implicitly has a default value of 0, and 
\f4CLE_T_INVBOOL\f1 implicitly has a default value of 1.  The contents 
of the \f4deflt\f1 field is ignored for these types.
.P
The \f4specialfn\f1 field is a pointer to a function of the form
.EX
int cleSpecialSetFn(char *arg, void *where, char *flag, void *data);
.EE
\f1
used only if the type is \f4CLE_T_SPECIAL\f1.  This function is passed 
the actual flag key in \f4flag\f1, the potential argument value in 
\f4arg\f1, the address to which the converted value should be written 
(from the CLE_ENTRY) in \f4where\f1, and a pointer to additional data 
(the \f4specData\f1 field of the CLE_ENTRY) in \f4data\f1.  The function 
should return 1 if the argument was recognized and used, 0 if the flag 
was correct but the argument was not used (i.e. the argument should be 
interpreted as another flag) or -1 (or any other value) to indicate a 
parsing error.
.P
The CLE_ENTRY \f4specData\f1 field is also used to pass the token table 
for \f4CLE_T_TOKEN\f1 flags.  This table is an array of CLE_TOKEN 
structures, which consist of simply a string and an integer; if the flag's 
argument matches the string, the value is set to that of the integer.  
There are a number of special cases for the token string, however:
.TP 12
"abc|def"
indicates several alternate patterns that should be accepted equivalently.
Thus "abc|def" matches either "abc" or "def".
.TP 12
"abc?de"
indicates that the part before the '?' is obligatory, but the 
remainder is optional.  Thus "abc?def" matches "abc", "abcd", "abcde" 
but does not match "ab" or "abce".
.TP 12
"*T", "*F" 
are shorthands for generic boolean specifiers.  "*T" maps
to "y?es|t?rue|1" and "*F" maps to "n?o|f?alse|0".
.TP 12
"%d"
is a special token indicating that any valid decimal integer will be 
accepted, and its value will be written into the argument (in this case, 
the integer portion of the CLE_TOKEN structure is ignored and should 
be set to 0).
.TP 12
"%f"
is like "%d" except any valid real value will be accepted.  Because the 
returned value is always an INT (since it may be one of the symbolic 
values), the float value is multiplied by the associated integer portion 
of the CLE_TOKEN structure before being written as the return value.
.TP 12
""
indicates that, if none of the other patterns are matched, the flag 
is permitted to be specified without an argument value, in which case 
its value is the specified integer.  This allows "-debug" to be made 
an alias for "-debug true" etc.  Because patterns are matched in order, 
this condition, if used, should always be at the bottom of the table.
.P
The CLE_TOKEN table is terminated by an entry with a NULL string.

.SH FUNCTIONS
\fBcleSetDefaults\fR is passed a pointer to the CLE_ENTRY table and sets 
up all the arguments for which default value strings were provided.
.P
\fBcleHandleArgs\fR is passed the CLE_ENTRY table pointer as well as 
the \f4argc\f1 and \f4argv\f1 passed to the \fBmain\fR procedure, and 
sets the argument values accordingly.  A non-zero return indicates 
errors parsing the command line arguments (which will already have
been reported to standard error).
.P
\fBcleExtractArgs\fR is almost the same, except if the \f4noExtraArgs\f1 
flag is not set, unrecognized arguments will not cause errors, but will 
simply be skipped.  On return, \f4*pargc\f1 and \f4argv\f1 have been 
modified to contain the command-line arguments that were not matched 
by the parsing process.  This allows, e.g., variable numbers of 
subsequent filenames to be passed through the cle functions.
.P
\fBcleUsage\fR prints a usage message to the standard error stream, 
based on the CLE_ENTRY table and program name passed to it.

.SH EXAMPLES
The following example code shows a number of the library features:
.EX
enum {AWCMP_MPEG_LAYER_I, AWCMP_MPEG_LAYER_II, AWCMP_MULTIRATE};
CLE_TOKEN algoTable[] = {
    { "mpeg?1|mp1", AWCMP_MPEG_LAYER_I },
    { "mpeg2|mp2",  AWCMP_MPEG_LAYER_II },
    { "mr"   ,  AWCMP_MULTIRATE },
    { NULL, 0 }
};

#define DFLT_ALGO "mpeg"
#define DFLT_FXBR 192000
int algoType;
int fixedBR;
int nokbd;
char *inpath, *outpath;

CLE_ENTRY clargs[] = {
    { "-a", CLE_T_TOKEN,  "algorithm type",
	  DFLT_ALGO, &algoType, NULL, algoTable },
    { "-F|-fix?br", CLE_T_LONG, "fixed bitrate",
	  QUOTE(DFLT_FXBR), &fixedBR, NULL, NULL },
    { "-nokbd", CLE_T_BOOL, "ignore the keyboard interrupt",
	  NULL, &nokbd, NULL, NULL },
    { "", CLE_T_STRING, "input sound file name",
	  NULL, &inpath, NULL, NULL },
    { "", CLE_T_STRING, "output compressed file name",
	  NULL, &outpath, NULL, NULL },
    { "", CLE_T_END, NULL,	
	  NULL, NULL, NULL, NULL }
};

int main(int argc, char **argv) {
    cleSetDefaults(clargs);
    if(cleHandleArgs(clargs, argc, argv)) {
	cleUsage(clargs, argv[0]);
	exit(-1);
    }
    ...
.EE
\f1
Note the use of the \f4QUOTE\f1 macro (defined in cle.h) to convert 
a manifest integer into a string suitable to be a default value. 
.P
The final pair of empty flags accept two unqualified argument values
Thus the program could be invoked as:
.EX
program -ampeg -fix 96000 infile.snd outfile.cmp
.EE
\f1

.SH CAVEATS
Patterns are matched in the order they are specified; potential 
ambiguities should be avoided by placing shorter alternatives later in the 
list.  In particular, mixing single and multiple-character flags can 
cause confusion due to single-character flag agglomeration - caution is 
advised.
.SH BUGS
"*T" and "*F" expansions are case sensitive.
.P
The automatic usage message ought to provide a little more interpretation 
of the special-case token flags.
.P
There's nothing to check that you don't submit ambiguous tables (or 
tables you probably don't mean), such as specifying -a before 
-algorithm; the latter would satisfy the former pattern (which would be
read as "-a lgorithm" or "-a -lgorithm) and thus never be used.
.P
Yet another set of pseudo-conventions and functional interface for 
Unix command-line handling.

.SH AUTHOR
Dan Ellis, 
.B dpwe@icsi.berkeley.edu
