.de Sh
.br
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.               \" Path Name
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de PN
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR\\$2
.el \fI\\$1\fP\\$2
..
.		\" The following macros added by dpwe for Ultrix 4..
.               \" Manual section reference
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de MS
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR(\\$2)\\$3
.el \fI\\$1\fP(\\$2)\\$3
..
.de EX		\" Begin Example
.ie \\n(.$ .nr EX \\$1n
.el \{\
.	ie n .nr EX 0n
.	el .nr EX 0n
.\}
.in +\\n(EXu
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
.nf
.CW
.ft CB
..
.de EE		\" End example
.in -\\n(EXu
.fi
.}f             \" restore basic text attributes
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
..
.TH SND 3 "1997 feb 06" dpwe   \" $Header: /u/drspeech/repos/dpwelib/snd.man,v 1.10 2012/01/05 21:21:40 dpwe Exp $
.SH NAME
SND - object-oriented soundfile library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <snd.h>\fR

\fI/\(** Basic management of the SOUND structure \(**/\fR
SOUND \fB*sndNew\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);
void \fBsndFree\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);

\fI/\(** Conventional file access \(**/\fR
SOUND \fB*sndOpen\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, char *\fIpath\fR, char *\fImode\fR);
int \fBsndNext\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);
void \fBsndClose\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);
long \fBsndReadFrames\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, void *\fIbuf\fR, long \fIframes\fR);
long \fBsndWriteFrames\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, void *\fIbuf\fR, long \fIframes\fR);
long \fBsndFrameTell\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);
long \fBsndFrameSeek\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, long \fIframeoffset\fR, int \fIwhence\fR);
int \fBsndFeof\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);

\fI/\(** Configuring SOUND attributes \(**/\fR
int \fBsndSetChans\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, int \fIchans\fR);
int \fBsndGetChans\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);
int \fBsndSetChanmode\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, int \fImode\fR);
int \fBsndGetChanmode\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);
int \fBsndSetUchans\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, int \fIchans\fR);
int \fBsndGetUchans\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);
int \fBsndSetFormat\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, int \fIformat\fR);
int \fBsndGetFormat\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);
int \fBsndSetUformat\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, int \fIformat\fR);
int \fBsndGetUformat\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);
long \fBsndSetFrames\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, long \fIframes\fR);
long \fBsndGetFrames\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);
double \fBsndSetSrate\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, double \fIsrate\fR);
double \fBsndGetSrate\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);
int \fBsndSetSFformat\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, int \fIfmt\fR);
int \fBsndSetSFformatByName\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, char *\fIname\fR);
int \fBsndGetSFformat\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);

\fI/\(** Miscellaneous functions \(**/\fR
int \fBsndBytesPerFrame\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR);
void \fBsndPrint\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, FILE *\fIstream\fR, char *\fItag\fR);
void \fBsndDebugPrint\fR(SOUND *\fIsnd\fR, FILE *\fIstream\fR, char *\fItag\fR);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The 
.PN snd
library provides a convenient and abstract encapsulation of the low-level 
soundfile access routines provided by the
.MS sndf 3
library.  In addition to dynamic selection of soundfile formats possible 
with that library, 
.PN snd 
provides transparent translation of datatype and channel configuration 
between soundfile and client program, and also provides access to standard 
input and output, and audio hardware input and output as `virtual files' 
that look exactly like regular soundfiles (except they do not support 
repositioning of the file pointer).  Also, files compressed with 
.MS gzip 1
can be directly read or written (again, without seeks).
The library is constructed around 
the `opaque' \f4SOUND\f1 pointer, which all functions take as their first 
argument.  (A C++ version of this library is provided; see 
.MS Sound 3 ).
.SH USAGE
\f4SOUND\f1 structures are allocated and destroyed by \fBsndNew\fR and 
\fBsndFree\fR respectively.  If \fBsndNew\fR is passed a valid \f4SOUND\f1 
pointer, the format configurations (sampling rate, number of channels etc.) 
of the newly-allocated structure are cloned from that prototype, which is 
left untouched itself.  Passing 
NULL selects default soundfile parameters, where the defaults are taken 
from the underlying library (defined in \f4sndf.h\f1).  
.P
Once a \f4SOUND\f1 structure has been created, it can be associated with a 
file using \fBsndOpen\fR, which specifies the filename to read or write, 
and the access mode as the single-character strings "r" or "w" only, for 
reading an existing soundfile, or writing a new soundfile respectively.  
\fBsndClose\fR closes the associated file;  \fBsndFree\fR will also close 
any open file associated with the \f4SOUND\f1 structure if this has not 
already been done.  In order to create 
a new soundfile of given characteristics, a prototype \f4SOUND\f1 structure 
is created with \fBsndNew\fR, configured using the accessor functions 
described in the next section, then passed to \fBsndOpen\fR with the 
mode set to "w"; \fBsndOpen\fR returns the same \f4SOUND\f1 pointer it 
is passed.  However, when opening a file for writing in  
the default format, or opening any file for reading, 
there is no need to configure the \f4SOUND\f1 
structure before calling \fBsndOpen\fR;  in this case, \fBsndOpen\fR may 
be passed a NULL pointer, in which case it will allocate and return 
a new \f4SOUND\f1 pointer by calling \fBsndNew\fR internally.
.P
\fBsndNext\fR is used to move to the beginning of the 'next' sound 
chunk within a file.  For normal soundfiles, which contain only 
a single chunk, calling \fBsndNext\fR after opening the soundfile 
but before reading any data from the file will, notionally, move 
to the beginning of the first and only sound within the file and 
will return 1.  Subsequent accesses will be the same as if \fBsndNext\fR 
had been skipped.  However, certain files or streams may contain multiple 
sounds in sequence.  This usually arises with 'online utterance streams' 
using the 'Abbot' raw online format (which separates sounds by an 0x8000 
marker).  However, it could be that several soundfiles of another type 
(such as AIFFs) have been concatenated together.  In such cases, calling 
\fBsndNext\fR at the end of reading one sound will return 1 if there is 
another sound that can be read from this file, and will setup the 
\fBSOUND\fR structure to reflect this new sound.  When there are no 
more sounds to be read from a stream, \fBsndNext\fR returns 0.
When used with files open for writing, \fBsndNext\fR marks the 
boundary between two complete soundfiles.  This has only been used 
with writing Abbot online streams, so other soundfile formats may 
give unexpected results.
.P
Sampled sound data is accessed with \fBsndReadFrames\fR and 
\fBsndWriteFrames\fR.  These mimic the standard IO streams functions 
\fBfread\fR and \fBfwrite\fR, except the unit of transfer is always the 
the sample frame, i.e. one sample for each channel defined in the sound.  
The functions also perform any translation necessary between application 
and sound file, and return the count of sample frames successfully 
transferred.  This may be less than the requested count in the case of 
end-of-file or disk errors.  \fBsndFrameTell\fR, \fBsndFrameSeek\fR 
and \fBsndFeof\fR
similarly mirror standard IO functions, except that file position is 
always expressed in sample frames, not bytes.  The \f4whence\f1 argument to 
\fBsndFrameSeek\fR takes on one of the values \f4SEEK_SET\f1, 
\f4SEEK_REL\f1 or \f4SEEK_END\f1, as defined in 
.MS fseek 3s .
.P
\fBsndBytesPerFrame\fR returns the actual number of bytes in each sample 
frame for the \f4SOUND\f1 configuration it is passed i.e. the number of 
channels multiplied by the number of bytes per sample.  \fBsndPrint\fR
and \fBsndDebugPrint\fR print out details of the \f4SOUND\f1 configuration 
in a human-readable format to the specified stream;  the former is 
a useful description of the sound data, suitable for verbose applications, 
whereas the latter includes internal status information for the library, 
useful mainly in debugging the library itself.

.SH CONFIGURATION ACCESSOR FUNCTIONS
The \f4SOUND\f1 structure is configured and examined with a series of 
accessor functions, each of which has a `get' and a `set' version. 
The \fBsndGet...\fR functions read the current value of a particular 
attribute from the passed \f4SOUND\f1 structure.  The \fBsndSet...\fR 
functions change it to a new value (if possible), and return the 
value that parameter held before the change.  Each parameter is described 
below, indexed by the name of its `get' function:
.TP 12
.B sndGetChans
Accesses the number of channels present in the sound data as written 
to disk - e.g. usually 1, or 2 for stereo signals
.TP 12
.B sndGetUchans
The library provides for certain kinds of automatic translation between 
soundfile and client application, introducing potentially two values for 
the number of channels belonging to a \f4SOUND\f1 structure: namely, the 
number of channels it actually has on disk, and also the number of channels 
it appears to have to the library client.  This second, `user' value 
is accessed by the \fBUchans\fR functions.  If no call to 
\fBsndSetUchans\fR has been made, the number of channels passed through 
\fBsndReadFrames\fR and \fBsndWriteFrames\fR matches the number of 
channels stored on disk, as reported by \fBsndGetChans\fR.  If, however, 
\fBsndSetUchans\fR is called specifying a different number of channels, 
\fBsndReadFrames\fR and \fBsndWriteFrames\fR will effect conversion to and 
from that format on-the-fly, in the manner specified by 
\fBsndSetChanmode\fR.  Thus, although it is illegal to call 
\fBsndSetChans\fR after a soundfile has been opened with \fBsndOpen\fR, 
\fBsndSetUchans\fR may be called at any time, and will change the apparent 
number of channels accessed with subsequent calls to \fBsndReadFrames\fR 
and \fBsndWriteFrames\fR.  If \fBsndSetUchans\fR has not been called, 
\fBsndGetUchans\fR will return the same value as \fBsndGetChans\fR.
.TP 12
.B sndGetChanmode
If there is a difference between the number of channels present in the 
soundfile (reported by \fBsndGetChans\fR) and the number of channels in 
the data being handled by the read and write functions (reported by 
\fBsndGetUchans\fR), this parameter governs how translation will be 
performed.  The argument can be one of the \f4SCMD_\f1 constants defined 
in \f4snd.h\f1; \f4SCMD_MONO\f1 dictates that more numerous channels are 
mixed together to form fewer channels, and that fewer channels are 
distributed evenly across more numerous channels.  \f4SCMD_CHANx\f1 (where 
x can be 0, 1, 2 or 3) specifies that a single channel is constructed by 
taking only the specified channel of a multichannel signal, and that a 
multichannel signal is constructed from a single channel by copying it to 
just one of its channels, leaving the others as zero.  Translation between 
multichannel sounds (e.g. stereo to 4-channel) is not presently defined.  
The default behavior is \f4SCMD_MONO\f1.
.TP 12
.B sndGetFormat
Returns the \f4SFMT_\f1 code (defined in \f4sndf.h\f1) corresponding to 
the binary format of the individual samples in the soundfile (e.g. 8 bit 
integer \f4SFMT_CHAR\f1 or 32 bit floats \f4SFMT_FLOAT\f1).
.TP 12
.B sndGetUformat
As with \fBsndGetUchans\fR, the library will perform sample format 
conversion on the fly between application and soundfile.  
\fBsndSetUformat\fR may be called at any time before or after a soundfile 
has been opened, and will defined the type of data pointed to by the 
\f4buf\f1 arguments to subsequent calls to \fBsndReadFrames\fR and 
\fBsndWriteFrames\fR.  The library will then perform format conversions as 
required to accommodate the soundfile data format set at the time of file 
opening, which \fBsndGetFormat\fR will continue to report.  
\fBsndGetUformat\fR returns the format set most recently by 
\fBsndSetUformat\fR, or if \fBsndSetUformat\fR has never been called for 
this particular \f4SOUND\f1, it will return the same as \fBsndGetFormat\fR.
.TP 12
.B sndGetSrate
Accesses the sampling rate associated with the sound data.  
\fBsndSetSrate\fR may only be called on a \f4SOUND\f1 structure that 
has yet to be associated with a file via \fBsndOpen\fR, and only has 
any meaning if the file is to be opened for writing (created).
.TP 12
.B sndGetFrames
Accesses the total number of frames constituting the current soundfile.  
This may be \f4SNDF_UNK_LEN\f1 (from \f4sndf.h\f1) if the soundfile 
does not specify the length (e.g. for data being written in real time to a 
pipe).  Also, the number of frames in a new \f4SOUND\f1 structure to be 
used for writing will be unknown; however, it may be useful to set it to 
some value before opening the file for write - if that value can be known 
at that stage - since it allows that information to be written into the 
header at the first attempt, which may be the only opportunity to write 
the header for non-seekable streams such as pipes or standard output.
.TP 12
.B sndGetSFformat
The facilities the 
.MS sndf 3
library provides for configuring at run-time the particular soundfile format 
to be used are accessed via this parameter.  Call 
\fBsndSetSFformat\fR with one of the 
\f4SFF_\f1 codes defined in \f4sndf.h\f1 before opening in write mode 
to create a file in a particular format.  
Similarly, \fBsndSetSFformatByName\fR will set the type using one of the 
short names defined in 
.MS sndf 3 .
On reading, setting the file type 
pre-empts the usual process of guessing the file type; if the opened file is 
not of the specified type, an error is returned.  
\fBsndGetSFformat\fR will return 
the code for the actual format identified when the current file was opened.
It is an error to attempt to set the soundfile format of an open file.
.SH STREAMS, COMPRESSED FILES AND AUDIO HARDWARE
In addition to working with conventional soundfiles on disk, all the 
.PN snd
functions can also used to access the standard input and output of Unix 
programs (permitting soundfiles to be passed over Unix pipes), 
read and write compressed files (by constructing a 
.MS popen 3S
pipe including 
.MS gzip 1 )
and also 
any real-time sound input/output hardware present on a particular machine 
(by employing the portable 
.MS audIO 3
library).  These special modes are controlled by special file names:
.P
Calling \fBsndOpen\fR with a filename of "-" will connect to standard 
input (for read mode) or standard output (for writing).  Typically, this 
can be specified directly by the user without any particular accommodation 
by the client application (other than permitting a file name of "-").  
(However, there is no provision for accessing a disk file called "-" except 
via a qualified name such as "./-".  Such files are normally the cause of 
much trouble in any case).  
.P
Paths matching the glob patterns "*.Z" or "*.gz" are assumed to refer to 
compressed files.  
These patterns can be overridden with a colon-separated list in the 
environment variable SND_PATS_SGZ; in particular, setting this to "*" 
will cause all files to be processed as follows.
On reading, the PATH environment variable is searched 
for 
.MS gzcat 1 , 
.MS gunzip 1
(used as "gunzip -c"), or
.MS gzip 1 
(used as "gzip -d -c"), and, if one is found, a pipe is constructed 
via
.MS popen 3S
to read uncompressed bytes straight from the gzip process.  On writing, 
.MS gzip 1
is searched for, and the output data are written through a gzip process 
to create a ready-compressed file.
.P
Similarly, files matching "*.shn" (overridden with SND_PATS_SHN) 
are assumed to be files compressed 
with Tony Robinson's 
.MS shorten 1
soundfile compression utility (see ftp://svr-ftp.eng.cam.ac.uk/pub/comp.speech/coding/shorten.tar.gz).  A pipe is opened to read or write files through 
this program when the file name matches.  The binary "shorten" must 
be in the path.  Version 2.0 seems best, because it does not insist 
that the soundfiles are MS_WAVE as 2.3 does.  Extra flags to be passed 
to shorten can be specified with the SHORTEN_ROPTS and SHORTEN_WOPTS 
environment variables, for reading and writing respectively.  (This 
feature was added to allow "-t s16lh" to be passed to the shorten invoked 
on the BBC wavfiles provided by Softsound - the uncompressed NIST headers 
claim that the data is "01", but shorten reconstructed it as big-endian 
by default.)
.P
Further, filenames matching "*.mp3" (or the contents of SND_PATS_MP3) 
are read after piping through mpg123 (with the addition of extra 
flags from MP3_ROPTS), and written by piping to lame (with optional 
arguments from MP3_WOPTS).  Because this is done externally, in a 
pipe, the sound data arrives as a raw binary stream; you must also 
set PCMFORMAT (or specify something like "-S PCM/R...", depending 
on the program) to make sure the underlying program knows the sampling 
rate etc.
.P
Finally, filenames matching "*.flac" (or the contents of SND_PATS_FLAC) 
are read after piping through flac (with the addition of extra 
flags from FLAC_ROPTS), and written by piping to flac (with optional 
arguments from FLAC_WOPTS).  As with MP3 access, the header information 
must be provided separately in the PCMFORMAT environment variable, or 
via command-line format arguments.
.P
Audio hardware is accessed via the special name "@".  When writing, the 
audio output hardware will be configured to match the characteristics of 
the sound data being written (and will fail if these characteristics are 
rejected by the 
.MS audIO 3
library).  For reading, however, some format specification must be provided 
from elsewhere to configure the hardware.  This will default to the 
`standard' defaults in \f4sndf.h\f1, but these can be overridden by adding 
extra characters to the name after the "@", in the syntax of the 
\f4PCMFORMAT\f1 environment variable used to provide header information for 
the headerless raw/PCM files for 
.MS sndf 3 .
Briefly, a name is built by appending any of "R" followed by the sampling 
rate in Hertz, "C" followed by the number of channels, and "F" followed by 
a one-character code to specify data format.  Thus calling 
\fBsndOpen\fR to read from a file called "@R8000Fu" will attempt to 
configure available sound input hardware to supply mu-law samples at 8000 
Hz, with the number of channels specified by \f4SNDF_DFLT_CHANS\f1 in 
\f4sndf.h\f1 (typically 2).  See the section on \f4PCMFORMAT\f1 in 
.MS sndf 3
for the full range of codes.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SH BUGS
Selecting compressed-file-access by the "*.Z" and "*.gz" templates is 
rather inflexible.  It might be nice to have a way to control this 
feature for any file name, but it's hard to retrofit.  Adding or changing 
the patterns is a snap - search for .gz in snd.c.
.SH SEE ALSO
.MS sndf 3 ,
.MS audIO 3 .
.SH AUTHOR
Dan Ellis, 
.B dpwe@icsi.berkeley.edu
