.de Sh
.br
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.               \" Path Name
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de PN
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR\\$2
.el \fI\\$1\fP\\$2
..
.		\" The following macros added by dpwe for Ultrix 4..
.               \" Manual section reference
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de MS
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR(\\$2)\\$3
.el \fI\\$1\fP(\\$2)\\$3
..
.de EX		\" Begin Example
.ie \\n(.$ .nr EX \\$1n
.el \{\
.	ie n .nr EX 0n
.	el .nr EX 0n
.\}
.in +\\n(EXu
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
.nf
.CW
.ft CB
..
.de EE		\" End example
.in -\\n(EXu
.fi
.}f             \" restore basic text attributes
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
..
.TH SNDF 3 "1997 jan 31" dpwe   \" $Header: /u/drspeech/repos/dpwelib/sndf.man,v 1.23 2006/07/08 20:54:19 gelbart Exp $
.SH NAME
SNDF - a low-level sound file interface library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <sndf.h>\fR

\fI/\(** Basic management of the SFSTRUCT structure \(**/\fR
int  \fBSFAlloc\fR(SFSTRUCT **\fIpsnd\fR, long \fIdataBsize\fR, int \fIformat\fR, double \fIsrate\fR, int \fIchans\fR, int \fIinfoBsize\fR);
void \fBSFFree\fR(SFSTRUCT *\fIsnd\fR);

\fI/\(** Reading a soundfile header \(**/\fR
int  \fBSFReadHdr\fR(FILE *\fIfile\fR, SFSTRUCT *\fIsnd\fR, int \fIinfoBmax\fR);
int  \fBSFRdXInfo\fR(FILE *\fIfile\fR, SFSTRUCT *\fIsnd\fR, int \fIdone\fR);
int  \fBSFAllocRdHdr\fR(FILE *\fIfile\fR, SFSTRUCT **\fIpsnd\fR);
FILE *\fBSFOpenRdHdr\fR(char *\fIpath\fR, SFSTRUCT *\fIsnd\fR, int \fIinfoBmax\fR);
FILE *\fBSFOpenAllocRdHdr\fR(char *\fIpath\fR\fR, SFSTRUCT **\fIpsnd\fR\fR);

\fI/\(** Writing a soundfile header \(**/\fR
int  \fBSFWriteHdr\fR(FILE *\fIfile\fR, SFSTRUCT *\fIsnd\fR, int \fIinfoBmax\fR);
FILE *\fBSFOpenWrHdr\fR(char *\fIpath\fR, SFSTRUCT *\fIsnd\fR);
void \fBSFCloseWrHdr\fR(FILE *\fIfile\fR, SFSTRUCT *\fIsnd\fR);
void \fBSFFinishWrite\fR(FILE *\fIfile\fR, SFSTRUCT *\fIsnd\fR);
void \fBSFClose\fR(FILE *\fIfile\fR);

\fI/\(** stdio-style access to the file contents \(**/\fR
size_t \fBSFfread\fR(void *\fIptr\fR, int \fItype\fR, size_t \fInitems\fR, FILE *\fIstream\fR);
size_t \fBSFfwrite\fR(void *\fIptr\fR, int \fItype\fR, size_t \fInitems\fR, FILE *\fIstream\fR);
int \fBSFfseek\fR(FILE *\fIstream\fR, long \fIoffset\fR, int \fIptrname\fR);
int \fBSFftell\fR(FILE *\fIstream\fR);
int \fBSFfeof\fR(FILE *\fIstream\fR);

\fI/\(** Transferring entire soundfiles at once \(**/\fR
int  \fBSFRead\fR(char *\fIpath\fR, SFSTRUCT **\fIpsnd\fR);
int  \fBSFWrite\fR(char *\fIpath\fR, SFSTRUCT *\fIsnd\fR);

\fI/\(** Other utility functions \(**/\fR
int  \fBSFInfoSize\fR(SFSTRUCT *\fIsnd\fR);
char *\fBSFDataLoc\fR(SFSTRUCT *\fIsnd\fR); 
int  \fBSFSampleSizeOf\fR(int \fIformat\fR);
int  \fBSFSampleFrameSize\fR(SFSTRUCT *\fIsnd\fR);
char *\fBSFErrMsg\fR(int \fIerr\fR);
void \fBSFDie\fR(int \fIerr\fR, char *\fImsg\fR);

\fI/\(** Managing dynamic soundfile type selection \(**/\fR
int  \fBSFSetDefaultFormat\fR(int \fIid\fR);
int  \fBSFSetDefaultFormatByName\fR(char *\fIname\fR);
int  \fBSFSetFormat\fR(FILE *\fIfile\fR, int \fIid\fR, int \fImode\fR);
int  \fBSFSetFormatByName\fR(FILE *\fIfile\fR, char *\fIname\fR);
int  \fBSFGetFormat\fR(FILE *\fIfile\fR, int *\fIpmode\fR);
void \fBSFListFormats\fR(FILE *\fIstream\fR);
char *\fBSFFormatName\fR(int \fIid\fR);
int  \fBSFFormatToID\fR(char *\fIname\fR);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
\f1
.PN sndf
is a low-level library that handles the reading and writing of various 
soundfile formats using stdio-type file access functions (see
.MS fopen 3 ).  A single functional interface has had backends written 
for a variety of soundfile formats (AIFF, NeXT/Sun, MS-WAVE, NIST/SPHERE, 
STRUT, ESPS), 
and the library may be compiled either to use just one of these backends, 
or to choose them automatically at run-time.
.PN sndf 
provides low-level access and multiple entry points to support a wide 
rage of uses, and does not enforce any particular correspondance between 
a file (i.e. a FILE pointer) and sound data (i.e. an SFSTRUCT pointer).  
For a more integrated interface, programmers might prefer the 
higher level
.MS snd 3 
library which is built upon the 
.PN sndf
facilities.
.PN sndf 
attempts to be compatible, wherever possible, with streamed data 
(e.g. over a Unix pipe), meaning that unnecessary seeks are avoided.
.P

.SH BASIC CONCEPTS
The 
.PN sndf
library defines the \f4SFSTRUCT\f1 as follows:
.RS
.LP
.ta .5i +.5i +1.5i +.5i
.nf
.ft 3
.\"typedef struct sfstruct    {
    long    magic;	/\(** magic number to identify \(**/
    long    headBsize;	/\(** byte offset from start to data \(**/
    long    dataBsize;	/\(** number of bytes of data \(**/
    int     format;	/\(** format specifier \(**/
    int     channels;	/\(** mono/stereo etc  \(**/
    float   samplingRate;	/\(** .. of the data   \(**/
    char    info[SFDFLTBYTS];	/\(** extendable byte area \(**/
.\"    } SFSTRUCT;
.ft
.fi
.RE
.LP
The actual size of the \f4info\fP extensible byte area is defined by 
the \f4headBsize\fP, which is the total size (in bytes) of the header 
including the \f4info\fP field.  The \f4SFSTRUCT\f1 normally exists alone, 
but in certain contexts (e.g. for \fBSFRead\fR and \fBSFWrite\fR) it is 
assumed to be immediately followed by the entire block of sound data 
which it describes, whose length (in bytes) will be \f4dataBsize\f1.  In other 
contexts, \f4dataBsize\f1 can define the length of a sound in a soundfile, 
or can be \f4SF_UNK_LEN\f1 (which is defined as (-1)), to indicate 
an unknown length.
.P
The \f4format\fP field describes the format of the sound data, and takes 
one of the following values (defined in 
.PN sndf.c
):
.P
.ta .5i +1.5i
.nf
	\f4SFMT_ALAW\f1	a-law bytes (8 bit/sample)
	\f4SFMT_ULAW\f1	u-law bytes (8 bit/sample)
	\f4SFMT_CHAR\f1	linear bytes (8 bit/sample)
	\f4SFMT_CHAR_OFFS\f1	linear bytes offset so that zero is at 0x80
	\f4SFMT_SHORT\f1	linear short ints (16 bits/sample)
	\f4SFMT_LONG\f1	linear long ints (32 bit/sample)
	\f4SFMT_FLOAT\f1	floating point (32 bit/sample)
	\f4SFMT_DOUBLE\f1	double precision floats (64 bit/sample)
.fi
.LP
The \f4channels\f1 field specifies the number of channels - 1 for mono, 2 for 
stereo, 4 for quad (defined as \f4SF_MONO\f1, \f4SF_STEREO\f1 and 
\f4SF_QUAD\f1 respectively) 
or possibly more.  When more than one channel of data is present, the data 
order is defined to have channels as the fastest-rotating dimension i.e. the 
sequence of samples for stereo is left sample for time 0, right sample for 
time 0, left sample for time 1, right sample for time 1 etc.
.P
The \f4samplingRate\f1 field holds the sampling rate, in samples per second, 
for the data, which can be non-integral.
.P
The \f4info\f1 field is used to store additional information that might 
be associated with particular soundfile formats and is assumed to be 
ASCII text (although how it is actually stored in soundfiles depends 
on the particular implementation).  For instance, it is used to 
hold and propogate unrecognized fields in NIST/SPHERE headers.
.P
\fBSFAlloc\fR and \fBSFFree\fR allocate and destroy the basic sndf structure.  
The data block allocated by SFAlloc will incorporate the values passed 
for \f4infoBsize\f1 (the total size to give to the \f4info\f1 array) 
and \f4dataBsize\f1 (an empty block following the header);  specifying 
\f4dataBsize\f1 as \f4SF_UNK_LEN\f1 allocates just a header structure.
.P
For reading soundfiles, 
\fBSFReadHdr\fR reads a header from an open file, which it attempt to 
seek back to zero first if it can.  It will fill in the fields of 
the pre-allocated \f4SFSTRUCT\f1 indicated by the pointer it is passed, 
and it will read no more than \f4infoBmax\f1 bytes into the header's
\f4info\f1 field.  It is the caller's responsibility to check the 
\f4headerBsize\f1 field that is returned to see if this was adequate; 
if not, the caller should reallocate the \f4SFSTRUCT\f1, then immediately 
call \fBSFRdXInfo\fR with the new copy of the \f4SFSTRUCT\f1, indicating, 
in the \f4done\f1 argument, how many bytes of information have already 
been transferred (\f4infoBmax\f1 from the previous call).  The remainder 
of the information will be read.
.P
\fBSFAllocReadHdr\fR will take care of allocating a new \f4SFSTRUCT\f1 
adequate for holding all the information in the soundfile header, and 
will return its address in \f4*psnd\f1.  \fBSFOpenRdHdr\fR takes a 
filename (in \f4path\f1) as input, opens it as a soundfile and fills 
in the \f4SFSTRUCT\f1 it is given, possibly requiring a subsequent call 
to \fBSFRdXInfo\f1.  The return is the file pointer for the open file.  
\fBSFOpenAllocRdHdr\fR both opens the file and allocates the \f4SFSTRUCT\f1 
structure, and is often the most convenient.
.P
For writing soundfiles, \fBSFWriteHdr\fR writes a header with fields defined 
by the \f4SFSTRUCT\f1 to the open file pointed to by \f4file\f1.  If 
\f4infoBmax\f1 is zero, all characters in the header's \f4info\f1 field 
(as determined by the \f4headBsize\f1 field) will be written; otherwise, 
at most the number specified will be written.  \fBSFOpenWrHdr\fR 
creates a new file named by \f4path\f1, and writes a preliminary 
header to it as specified by \f4snd\f1, returning the file pointer 
for writing data.  \fBSFCloseWrHdr\fR can be used to close that file, 
after, if possible (i.e. if seeking is supported), updating the header 
with the possibly-revised data in \f4snd\f1.  If the \f4dataBlen\f1 field 
of the passed \f4snd\f1 is zero or \f4SF_UNK_LEN\f1, 
it guesses the length of data written out to the file from the 
current file pointer, and rewrites the soundfile header to reflect 
that data length.  If \f4snd\f1 is NULL, it similarly guesses the 
amount of data written to the file and updates just that field in 
the original header.
.P
\fBSFFinishWrite\fR behaves the same as \fBSFCloseWrHdr\fR except that 
the file is not closed; this permits writing multiple files on a single 
stream, most typically used with the PCM/Abbot online audio format.  
\fBSFClose\fR does the actual file close, thus a call to \fBSFFinishWrite\fR 
followed by \fBSFClose\fR is exactly equivalent to a call to \fBSFCloseWrHdr\fB.
.P
Once a soundfile has been opened, the functions 
\fBSFfread\fR, \fBSFfwrite\fR, \fBSFfseek\fR, \fBSFftell\fR and \fBSFfeof\fR 
exactly mirror their corresponding standard I/O functions, while also 
providing any necessary data fixup (such as byte swapping), and adjusting 
the file indices (for seek and tell) to disguise the presence of the 
header.   
.P
\fBSFRead\fR and \fBSFWrite\fR hide the details of the file access 
completely from the client, reading an entire sound file (header and 
data) into memory from a named file, or writing a new file from an 
entire in-memory sound, respectively.  Typically, they are only useful 
when the sound can be guaranteed to be small.
.P
Apart from the standard I/O mirrors, most functions return an integer 
error code from the following set defined in \f4sndf.c\f1:
.P
.ta .5i +1.5i
.nf
	\f4SFE_OK\f1	No error (= 0)
	\f4SFE_NOPEN\f1	Unable to open file
	\f4SFE_NSF\f1	Object could not be recognized as a sound file
	\f4SFE_MALLOC\f1	Unable to allocate enough memory
	\f4SFE_RDERR\f1	Error reading from a file
	\f4SFE_WRERR\f1	Error writing to a file
.fi
.LP
The functions that return file pointers will return NULL on an error; 
in this case, the error code can be examined in the global variable 
\f4SFerror\f1.
.P
The remaining utility functions provide a variety of ancilliary functions.
\fBSFInfoSize\fR returns the actual size of the \f4info\f1 array in the 
header.  \fBSFDataLoc\fR returns a pointer to the beginning of the data 
area, assuming it is immediately after the \f4SFSTRUCT\f1 (e.g. after an 
\fBSFRead\fR).  \fBSFSampleSizeOf\fR takes one of the \f4SFMT_\f1 codes 
and returns the number of bytes per sample it implies (this function 
is actually prototyped in \f4sndfutil.h\f1 now); \fBSFSampleFrameSize\fR 
takes instead an \f4SFSTRUCT\f1, and returns the total number of bytes 
occupied by each sample \fItime-frame\fR, i.e. incorporating the effect of 
multiple channels.  
.P
\fBSFErrMsg\fR returns a brief textual error message for whichever of 
the \f4SFE_\f1 error codes it is passed.  \fBSFDie\fR prints an error 
message corresponding to the \f4SFE_\f1 code it is passed, as well 
as an optional additional message (such as a file name), then 
exits with completion code 1.
.SH FILE FORMAT SELECTION
The final set of functions control the dynamic selection of soundfile 
formats (when this is enabled at compile time by choosing the 
\f4sndfbyptr\f1 target instead of the \f4sndf\f1 target in the 
\f4Makefile\f1).
Soundfile formats are referred to either by an id code from \f4sndf.h\f1 
or by a short keyword string, according to the following table:
.ta .5i +1.5i +.5i
.nf
	\f4SFF_UNKNOWN\f1		Unknown soundfile, or none selected (= -1).
	\f4SFF_RAW\f1	"PCM"	Headerless sound data (see below).
	\f4SFF_NEXT\f1	"NeXT"	NeXT/Sun *.snd/*.au format.
	\f4SFF_AIFF\f1	"AIFF"	Apple/SGI Audio Interchange File Format.
	\f4SFF_MSWAVE\f1	"MSWAVE"	Microsoft RIFF/WAVE format.
	\f4SFF_NIST\f1	"NIST"	NIST/SPHERE speech format.
	\f4SFF_STRUT\f1	"STRUT"	STRUT variant of NIST format.
	\f4SFF_IRCAM\f1	"IRCAM"	Csound/IRCAM format.
	\f4SFF_ESPS\f1	"ESPS"	Entropics ESPS FEA_SD *.sd soundfile format (experimental - see SUPPORTED FILE FORMATS).
.fi
.LP
Dynamic file selection operates as follows.  The system has a notion of 
a 'current' soundfile format, which can be 'unknown', or any of the other 
formats.  If the current format is 'unknown', then when a file is opened, the 
system looks at the first few bytes of the file to guess its type.  If it 
can be identified, it is opened as that type, and the current format is 
set to that type.  If the current format is any type other than 'unknown', 
the library will not attempt to guess the file format, but return an error 
unless the file is of that specific type.  Note that the file-identifying 
routine cannot positively identify a raw (PCM) file, since it has no 
header; thus the only way to open a soundfile of this type is to set the 
current soundfile format to SFF_RAW explicitly, then perform the open.
.P
When writing, the file is created in the current soundfile format; if 
this is unknown, the library reverts to a default format.  This can be 
set by the \f4SNDFFTYPE\f1 environment variable, which should be set 
to one of the keywords from the table above.  If this variable is not 
set or not recognized, the library employs the default set
at compile time via a -D flag; this can be selected to any of the 
types in the Makefile and is typically AIFF or PCM.
.P 
Client programs can set the current soundfile format with either 
\fBSFSetDefaultFormat\fR, which takes one of the \f4SFF_\f1 codes as 
an argument, or \fBSFSetDefaultFormatByName\fR, which takes one of the 
character strings from the table above.  These routines return 1 on success 
or 0 if the type is not known.  To reset the current format to 'unknown', 
call \fBSFSetDefaultFormat\fR with the argument \f4SFF_UNKNOWN\f1 (this 
has no equivalent in \fBSFSetDefaultFormatByName\fR).  When either of 
these routines successfully set the current format, they also set the 
default format (the format of files created when the current format is 
'unknown') to the same value.  \fBSFSetFormat\fR can be used to set 
the format (and byteswapping mode from the symbols in <dpwelib/byteswap.h> 
associated with a particular file without affecting the 
current or default formats;  however, since a file must already be open 
in order to have the file pointer used as the argument, it is not clear 
when this function would be usable.  \fBSFSetFormatByName\fR performs a 
similar function, but using a file format expressed in a string instead of 
the id code.  Changing the soundfile format 
mid-access (i.e. after the file has been opened and initial header access 
completed) has unpredictable results.  It could be used if a file was 
opened by the client using \fBfopen\fR, but before any call to either
\fBSFReadHdr\fR or \fBSFWriteHdr\fR.
.P
Soundfile formats are queried with \fBSFGetFormat\fR.  To query the format 
associated with a particular file, pass this function that file's 
FILE pointer.  To query the current soundfile format, pass NULL as 
the file pointer.  If the current format is unknown, this will 
return the default format.  All returns are in the form of \f4SFF_\f1 
codes.  If pmode is not null, it will be filled with the byteswapping 
mode for that file (a code from <dpwelib/byteswap.h>).  
\fBSFGetDefaultFormat\fR returns the current format which soundfiles 
will be assumed to have, which is the same as \fBSFGetFormat\fR with 
a NULL file pointer except in the case when there is no current format 
(meaning that the library will attempt to identify the type of 
files that it reads).  In this case, \fBSFGetDefaultFormat\fB will 
return \f4SFF_UNKNOWN\f1 rather than the default format.  Hence, 
the return from \fBSFGetDefaultFormat\fR can later be passed to 
\fBSFSetDefaultFormat\fR to restore exactly the same treatment for 
subsequently opened files.
.P
\fBSFFormatName\fR returns the keyword string associated with a particular 
\f4SFF_\f1 code, or the string "<UNKNOWN>" for \f4SFF_UNKNOWN\f1 and 
unrecognized codes.  \fBSFFormatToID\fR returns the \f4SFF_\f1 code 
corresponding to the keyword string it is passed, or \f4SFF_UNKNOWN\f1
if no match is found.  All keyword string comparisons are case-sensitive.
.P
\fBSFListFormats\fR prints out the keywords for the known soundfile 
formats to the specified standard output stream, separated by spaces. 
This is intended to be used in help messages for applications that 
accept the keywords directly and pass them to the library 
(i.e. to \fBSFSetDefaultFormatByName\fR or \fBSFFormatToID\fR) without 
further interpretation.
.P
If the library has been compiled for static (compile-time) soundfile 
selection (i.e. by specifying the target \f4sndf.o\f1 instead of 
\f4sndfbyptr.o\f1 in the Makefile), all these routines are replaced 
by stubs.  The calls to set formats all succeed, but print a warning 
message to standard error to the effect that they have done nothing.  
\fBSFGetFormat\fR and \fBSFFormatToID\fR always returns \f4SFF_UNKNOWN\f1, 
\fBSFListFormats\fR prints a message to the effect that no selectable 
formats exist, and \fBSFFormatName\fR always returns "SNDF" to indicate 
that the format is whichever one for which the SNDF library was compiled.
.SH SUPPORTED FILE FORMATS
The following additional notes are specific to certain soundfile formats;
.SH Apple/SGI AIFF (sndfaif.c)
The library will read both AIFF and AIFC (version 1) type files, 
but it doesn't 
know any AIFC compression schemes, so access will only succeed for 
type 'uncompressed'.  Written files are always AIFF.  
.P
AIFF files only support linear data formats (SFMT_CHAR, SFMT_SHORT and 
SFMT_LONG).
.SH Raw PCM (sndfpcm.c)
When reading raw data, the header information (channels, sample rate, 
data format) is taken from the defaults \f4SNDF_DFLT_CHANS\f1, 
\f4SNDF_DFLT_SRATE\f1 and \f4SNDF_DFLT_FORMAT\f1 defined in sndf.h.
However, these can be overridden by setting a Unix environment 
variable, \fBPCMFORMAT\fR (or as part of the \fBSNDFFTYPE\fR environment 
variable - see below).  If defined, this string will be 
parsed and used to override the defaults.  It should be something 
like "R8000C1X8EbFs", where the number after the "C" is the number of 
channels, and "X" is an optional count of initial bytes to skip (e.g. for an 
alien header).  "E" specifies the byte-ordering for multi-byte data, with "b" 
indicating big-endian (SGI, Mac) ordering, and "l" indicating little-endian 
(DEC, x86) ordering (big-endian by default; also, "En" is for natural order 
-- meaning machine-dependent, and "Es" forces byteswapping regardless of 
machine architecture).   The number after the "R" is the sample rate 
in Hz; as a special case, the "R" data may be specified in kHz 
if it is 8, 11, 16, 22, 24, 32, 44 or 48.  The "F" key is followed by a 
code letter that specifies the data type, accepting the 
following codes:
.ta .5i +1.5i
.nf
	\f4c\f1	SFMT_CHAR (8 bit linear)
	\f48\f1	same as \f4c\f1
	\f4s\f1	SFMT_SHORT (16 bit linear)
	\f416\f1	same as \f4s\f1
	\f4l\f1	SFMT_LONG (32 bit linear)
	\f432\f1	same as \f4l\f1
	\f4u\f1	SFMT_ULAW (8 bit nonlinear)
	\f4a\f1	SFMT_ALAW (8 bit nonlinear)
	\f4o\f1	SFMT_CHAR_OFFS (8 bit linear, zero is 0x80)
	\f4f\f1	SFMT_FLOAT (32 bit floating point)
	\f4d\f1	SFMT_DOUBLE (64 bit floating point)
.fi
.LP
Unspecified fields will revert to the default; unparseable strings
will report an error message, but continue with default values.  If
the input sound format is being specified to a program via a command
line option, a \fBPCMFORMAT\fR-style code string may be specified by
appending it to the PCM keyword by a slash, e.g.
.EX
	sndrfmt -S PCM/R16000C1Fs -T AIFF dummy.raw dummy.aif
.EE
.P
(such programs pass this string directly to \fBSFSetDefaultFormatByName\fR, 
which interprets the part after the slash).  The environment variable 
\fBSNDFFTYPE\fR acts as a default value for the "-S" style format 
specifier, thus it may also be used to set the default PCM treatment.  
These three specifications are combined as follows:  If a sound is to 
be treated as PCM, the format is initialized to its defaults (see 
below), then has any settings in the \fBPCMFORMAT\fR string written 
over it.  Then, if there is a codestring following the slash in 
the command-line format specification, this is overlaid.  If the 
program is not given a specification in the command line, the library 
will attempt to use the \fBSNDFFTYPE\fR value instead, but this 
value is ignored if a command line option is given.
.P
.B Abbot online format:
Having "Abb" in the \fBPCMFORMAT\fR variable (or appended to a command line 
specification or the \fBSNDFFTYPE\fR variable, as in "-S PCM/Abb") 
will make the PCM raw data be treated as Abbot online format.  This means 
that files are assumed to have 0x8000 appended (which is not part of the 
data); output shorts are clipped so that they never reach 0x8000 (it is 
mapped to 0x8001), and 0x8000 is written at the end of a stream just 
before closing it.  On reading a stream, encountering an 0x8000 will 
make the data act as if it has hit EOF (maybe).

.SH NIST/SPHERE format (sndfnist.c)
This routine recognizes only "NIST_1A"-type headers.  The only formats 
that are recognized are 8 and 16 bit linear, and 8 bit mulaw.  Either 
byte order is accepted for 16 bit samples.  No compressed formats 
are supported.

.SH STRUT format (sndfstrut.c)
This routine recognizes only "STRUT_1A"-type headers, which appear to 
be slightly expanded versions of the NIST_1A headers; the code is a 
slight modification of sndfnist.c.  Several additional header fields 
are added on output (duplicating existing information) in imitation of 
STRUT "samples" files seen in the wild.

.SH Entropics ESPS FEA_SD (*.sd) format (sndfesps.c)
This is an experimental module.  This file format can only be read, not 
written, and it cannot be auto-sensed, it must be specified explicitly 
with a "-S ESPS" flag.  I'm guessing at a lot of the structure, so 
I can't guarantee where it will work, but it works for the DIGITS files 
we have in this format here at ICSI, and also for a file written by ESPS 5.1's "btosps" command.

.SH ADDING NEW FILE FORMATS

.SH EXAMPLES

- sndfxxx.c
- new SF_ in sndf.h
- new -D in Makefile
- new blocks in sndfbyptr.c
- functions to provide
SFReadHdr
SFRdXInfo
SFWriteHdr
SFHeDaLen
SFLastSampleTell
FixupSamples
- functions to use
(sndffname)

.SH SEE ALSO
.MS snd 3
.SH AUTHOR
Dan Ellis, 
.B dpwe@icsi.berkeley.edu

