.de Sh
.br
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.               \" Path Name
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de PN
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR\\$2
.el \fI\\$1\fP\\$2
..
.		\" The following macros added by dpwe for Ultrix 4..
.               \" Manual section reference
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de MS
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR(\\$2)\\$3
.el \fI\\$1\fP(\\$2)\\$3
..
.de EX		\" Begin Example
.ie \\n(.$ .nr EX \\$1n
.el \{\
.	ie n .nr EX 0n
.	el .nr EX 0n
.\}
.in +\\n(EXu
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
.nf
.CW
.ft CB
..
.de EE		\" End example
.in -\\n(EXu
.fi
.}f             \" restore basic text attributes
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
..
.TH SNDMIX 1 "1999 oct 06" dpwe   \" $Header: /u/drspeech/repos/dpwelib/sndmix.man,v 1.1 1999/10/07 07:04:21 dpwe Exp $
.SH NAME
sndmix - mix together two soundfiles
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsndmix
[\-f \fIfactor1\fB]
[\-g \fIfactor2\fB]
[\-k \fIskip1\fB]
[\-l \fIskip2\fB]
[\-ld\fIdur\fB]
\fIsound1\fB
\fIsound2\fB 
[\fIoutsound\fB]
\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PN sndmix
mixes together (i.e. adds) two soundfiles to create a new file. 
The two sound files can be scaled independently via -f and -g 
which prefix real scale factors.  The files can also be shifted 
relative to one another in time; a positive skip value (-k or -l) 
skips that many seconds at the start of the first or second 
sound files.  Either skip can be negative, meaning that silence 
is prepended to pad out to the requested time.  The overall duration 
of the output is determined by -d; the sound will be truncated or 
padded to achieve this.  By default, the output continues until the 
ends of both input files are reached.  If no output file name 
is given, the default is the stem of sound 1 plus ".mix".
.P
Stereo files are mixed correctly, but both files must have the 
same number of channels.  See 
.MS sndrfmt 1 
for a tool to alter the channel configuration of soundfiles.
.SH BUGS
.SH NOTES
This is a Media-Lab era program, written in 1993 as "danmix".
.P
The program uses the soundfile access library of 
.MS sndf 3
which defines the kind of soundfile it will recognize, depending 
on its compilation options.
.SH SEE ALSO
.MS sndf 3 ,
.MS sndrfmt 1 .
.SH AUTHOR
Dan Ellis, 
.B dpwe@icsi.berkeley.edu 
(written as dpwe@media.mit.edu)

