.de Sh
.br
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.               \" Path Name
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de PN
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR\\$2
.el \fI\\$1\fP\\$2
..
.		\" The following macros added by dpwe for Ultrix 4..
.               \" Manual section reference
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de MS
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR(\\$2)\\$3
.el \fI\\$1\fP(\\$2)\\$3
..
.de EX		\" Begin Example
.ie \\n(.$ .nr EX \\$1n
.el \{\
.	ie n .nr EX 0n
.	el .nr EX 0n
.\}
.in +\\n(EXu
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
.nf
.CW
.ft CB
..
.de EE		\" End example
.in -\\n(EXu
.fi
.}f             \" restore basic text attributes
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
..
.TH SNDPLAY 1 "1996 nov 19" dpwe   \" $Header: /u/drspeech/repos/dpwelib/sndplay.man,v 1.10 2000/03/30 20:22:10 dpwe Exp $
.SH NAME
sndplay - play a soundfile through audio hardware.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsndplay 
[\-r \fIsampleRate\fB]
[\-b \fIbufferSize\fB]
[\-z \fIchunkSize\fB]
[\-c \fIchannels\fB]
[\-S \fIsffmt\fB]
[\-K \fIskipFrames\fB]
[\-D \fImaxFrames\fB]
[\-k \fIskiptime\fB]
[\-d \fImaxtime\fB]
[\-e \fIendtime\fB]
[\-g \fIgain\fB]
[\-l] 
[\-m] 
[\-q]
[\-v] 
[\fIinputSoundFiles ...\fB]
\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PN sndplay
plays a soundfile through built-in audio hardware.  Although most 
systems provide their own command to do this, 
.PN sndplay
provides a single interface to this function that has been ported 
over a number of Unix implementations, and can be compiled to accept 
a range of soundfile formats (using the 
.MS sndf 3
sound file interface library).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 12
.B \-r \fIsampleRate\fR
Force the soundfile to be played at the specified sampling rate 
(without resampling), so the sampling rate in the header will be 
ignored.
.TP 12
.TP 12
.B \-g \fIgain\fR
Scale each sample by this factor before playback e.g. to boost 
very quiet samples.  The factor is a floating point number;
default value of 1.0 performs no modification.
.TP 12
.B \-b \fIbufferSize\fR
The size (in frames) of the buffer that will be requested for the 
audio hardware.  This buffer size needs to be a compromise between 
processing delay and system responsiveness.  Only some systems 
provide control of this buffer.
.TP 12
.B \-z \fIchunkSize\fR
The size (in frames) of the blocks which will be passed to the audio 
hardware.  Although the program will attempt to choose the 'right' value 
for the available conditions, certain stressful situations may require 
hand-tuning to achieve a good balance of low overhead load and latency, 
or to accommodate intrinsic system limitations on buffer size. 
The default value is half the buffer size.
.TP 12
.B \-K \fIskipFrames\fR
Skip over this many frames at the beginning of the sound (after reading the 
header).  This is provided mainly to permit the test routines use sndplay 
as a way to test the seek function within the 
.MS snd 3
library!
.TP 12
.B \-D \fImaxFrames\fR
Play at most this many frames from the sound file.  Thus, -K and -D 
may be used in conjunction to play any subset of a long soundfile.
.TP 12
.B \-k \fIskiptime\fR
Skip over this amount of time (in sencods) at the beginning of 
the sound.  This option takes precedence over -K if both 
are specified.
.TP 12
.B \-d \fImaxtime\fR
Play sound for at most this long, specified in seconds.  This 
option takes precedence over -D if both are specified.
.TP 12
.B \-e \fIendtime\fR
As an alternative to specifying the duration, you can specify the 
end time (in seconds), which takes precedence over the duration.  
In this case, the sound will be played from skiptime to endtime, or 
to EOF if this comes first.
.TP 12
.B \-c \fIchannels\fR
Convert the sound data to have this many channels before playing it.  
Unlike the -b option, this option does respect the number of channels 
specified in the soundfile header, but will either combine or distribute 
them so that the data passed to the hardware has exactly the requested 
number of channels.
.TP 12
\fB\-S \fIsffmt\fR
Force the input soundfile to be treated as the type specified by 
the keyword.  This only applies if the 
.MS sndf 3
library has been compiled to use run-time determination of soundfile 
type; otherwise this option is ignored.  When it is active, the 
available soundfile keywords are listed in the usage message:
.EX
sndplay --
.EE
but currently include "AIFF" (Mac/SGI), "NeXT" (Sun/NeXT *.au/*.snd), 
"MSWAVE" (Microsoft RIFF/WAVE), "NIST" (NIST/SPHERE) and "PCM" 
(raw data, format optionally controlled by PCMFORMAT environment 
string or extra arguments after a slash, see
.MS sndf 3
).
.TP 12
.B \-l
Loop the soundfile to produce continuous, unending playback.
.TP 12
.B \-m
Attempt to read multiple soundfiles from the stream, for formats such 
as Abbott that support concatenated streams.  By default, each stream 
is just discarded after the first sound is read from it.
.TP 12
.B \-q
No-play operation (literally quiet).  Goes through all the motions of
playing sounds (including reporting messages to the console), but does 
not attempt to open sound hardware or write samples to it.  This is 
to allow sndplay to be used as a test program for the 
.MS snd 3
interface without it making a lot of noise.
.TP 12
.B \-v
Verbose mode - print diagnostic messages.
.TP 12
.B InputSoundFiles...
Zero or more soundfiles to be played in the order specified.  If there are 
none, sound input will be accepted from a pipe feeding the standard input.
.SH BUGS
Should maybe provide options to override all the 'header' information 
(sample rate, number of channels, sample format).
.SH NOTES
This program was originally called 'newplay' and was installed on the 
Media Lab Machine Listening Group machines as plain 'play'.  At ICSI, it 
is called 'sndplay' to reflect its common heritage with sndcvt and sndrfmt. 
(all using dpwelib).
.SH SEE ALSO
.MS sndf 3
.SH AUTHOR
Dan Ellis, 
.B dpwe@icsi.berkeley.edu 
(written as dpwe@media.mit.edu)

