.de Sh
.br
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.               \" Path Name
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de PN
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR\\$2
.el \fI\\$1\fP\\$2
..
.		\" The following macros added by dpwe for Ultrix 4..
.               \" Manual section reference
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de MS
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR(\\$2)\\$3
.el \fI\\$1\fP(\\$2)\\$3
..
.de EX		\" Begin Example
.ie \\n(.$ .nr EX \\$1n
.el \{\
.	ie n .nr EX 0n
.	el .nr EX 0n
.\}
.in +\\n(EXu
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
.nf
.CW
.ft CB
..
.de EE		\" End example
.in -\\n(EXu
.fi
.}f             \" restore basic text attributes
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
..
.TH SNDRECORD 1 "1996 nov 19" dpwe   \" $Header: /u/drspeech/repos/dpwelib/sndrecord.man,v 1.5 2000/03/14 22:13:23 dpwe Exp $

.SH NAME
sndrecord - record a soundfile from the audio hardware.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsndrecord 
[\-d \fIduration\fB]
[\-r \fIsampleRate\fB]
[\-c \fIchannels\fB]
[\-b \fIbufferSize\fB]
[\-k \fIchunkSize\fB]
[\-m] 
[\-v] 
[\-T \fIformat\fB]
[\fIoutputSoundFile\fB]
\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PN sndrecord
reads from the audio input hardware and writes the data to a 
soundfile.
Although most 
systems provide their own command to do this, 
.PN sndrecord 
provides a single interface to this function that has been ported 
over a number of Unix implementations, and can be compiled to generate 
a range of soundfile formats (using the 
.MS sndf 3
sound file interface library).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 12
.B \-d \fIduration\fR
Record sound for this many seconds (specified as a decimal).  
Recording can be stopped -- cleanly -- earlier than this 
with SIGINT (i.e. control-c) which is trapped to ensure the 
output soundfile headers are written correctly.  (default 1.0 sec).
.P
As a special case, a duration of zero is interpreted as infinite time, 
so that recording continues until the program is interrupted (or 
all the disk space is consumed, in which case the soundfile will 
NOT be cleanly closed).
.TP 12
.B \-r \fIsampleRate\fR
Configure the audio hardware and write the output soundfile with 
this sampling frequency.  (default 16000 Hz).
.TP 12
.B \-c \fIchannels\fR
Configure the audio hardware and write the output soundfile with 
this many channels (i.e. 1 for mono, 2 for stereo) (default is 1).
.TP 12
.B \-b \fIbufferSize\fR
Request that the audio hardware employs a buffer of this size on input.  
This controls the maximum number of samples that the hardware-operating 
system can get ahead of the program, and hence the maximum latency that 
will be observed. (defaults to the equivalent of 250 ms).
.B \-k \fIchunkSize\fR
Transfer data from the operating system interface in buffers of this size.  
Normally, these are half the size of the OS buffer, although they could 
be closer to that buffer size for lower-latency operation on a suitably 
fast machine.
.TP 12
\fB\-T \fIsffmt\fR
Force the output soundfile to be created as the type specified by 
the keyword.  This only applies if the 
.MS sndf 3
library has been compiled to use run-time determination of soundfile 
type; otherwise this option is ignored.  When it is active, the 
available soundfile keywords 
currently include "AIFF" (Mac/SGI), "NeXT" (Sun/NeXT *.au/*.snd), 
"MSWAVE" (Microsoft RIFF/WAVE), "NIST" (NIST/SPHERE) and "PCM" 
(raw data, format optionally controlled by PCMFORMAT environment 
string, see
.MS sndf 3
).
.TP 12
.B \-m
Monitor the recording by copying the input data to the audio output 
at the same time.
.TP 12
.B \-v
Verbose mode - print diagnostic messages.
.TP 12
.B OutputSoundFile
The name of the soundfile to be written to.  If this is absent, 
.PN sndrecord
can write live audio data into a pipe.
.SH BUGS
.SH SEE ALSO
.MS sndf 3
.SH AUTHOR
Dan Ellis, 
.B dpwe@icsi.berkeley.edu (written as dpwe@media.mit.edu)

