.de Sh
.br
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de PN
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR\\$2
.el \fI\\$1\fP\\$2
..
.		\" The following macros added by dpwe for Ultrix 4..
.               \" Manual section reference
.               \"      uses Courier fonts for V4.0
.de MS
.ie t \&\f(CB\\$1\f(NR(\\$2)\\$3
.el \fI\\$1\fP(\\$2)\\$3
..
.de EX		\" Begin Example
.ie \\n(.$ .nr EX \\$1n
.el \{\
.	ie n .nr EX 0n
.	el .nr EX 0n
.\}
.in +\\n(EXu
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
.nf
.CW
.ft CB
..
.de EE		\" End example
.in -\\n(EXu
.fi
.}f             \" restore basic text attributes
.if n .sp 1
.if t .sp .5v
..
.TH SNDRSMP 1 "$Date: 2006/08/27 20:53:38 $" dpwe
.SH NAME
sndrsmp - change the sampling rate of a soundfile (i.e. resample it)
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsndrsmp 
[\-{s|r} \fIrate\fB | \-f \fIfctr\fB]
[\-a \fIacc%\fB]
[\-h] 
[\-o]
[\-S \fIsffmt\fB]
[\-T \fIsffmt\fB]
\fIinputSoundFile\fB
[\fIoutputSoundFile\fB]
\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PN sndrsmp
implements high-accuracy, low-noise sinc interpolation in a relatively 
efficient fashion by finding an integer-ratio upsample/downsample pair 
that closely approximates the desired resampling factor.  The interpolator 
can then be run from a lookup table.
.PN sndrsmp
is built on the
.MS snd 3
soundfile system library, which offers access to many soundfile types 
and transparent access to pipes, sound hardware, compressed streams etc.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 12
.B \-s \fIrate\fR  \fB\-r\fR \fIrate\fR
Specify desired sampling rate of output file (sampling rate of input file 
is read from header).  Cannot be used with \-f .
.TP 12
.B \-f \fIfactor\fR
Specify factor which is applied to the input file sampling rate to 
obtain the output file sampling rate.  Cannot be used with \-s / \-r .
.TP 12
.B \-g \fIgain\fR
Specify gain constant by which all input samples are multiplied prior 
to processing.  If a particular clip just touches the limit of the 
dynamic range (i.e. max or min possible sample value), it's quite likely 
to overflow after low-pass filtering removes some of the rapid variation.
This leads to a nasty wrap-around click; use -g 0.8 or similar to avoid 
this (default 1.0).
.TP 12
.B \-a \fIacc%\fR
Match the desired resampling ratio to within this accuracy (in percent).  
The size of the integers in the ratio (and hence the lookup table) is 
increased until this accuracy is achieved.  Default is 0.1 % i.e. 
one-sixtieth of a semitone or 16 cents.
.TP 12
.B \-m \fImults\fR
How many points to use for each of the interpolator FIR filters.
(Hamming windowed sinc functions - can you believe it?).  This 
is directly proportional to the execution time of the program.  
The default is 32, which puts alias terms down by at least -60 dB.
This is quite conservative.  Acceptable but much faster results 
are possible with -m 8.
.TP 12
.B \-p \fIprop\fR
Set the sinc low-pass filter band edge to this proportion of the 
Nyquist rate.  The default of 0.9 means that slightly more of the 
spectrum than necessary is filtered out when downsampling, to ensure 
the absolute minimum of aliasing.
.TP 12
.B \-h
Perform resampling as normal, but set the sample rate field in the 
output file header to be the same as the input file.
.TP 12
.B \-o
Write output to standard output rather than a file.  Note:  this option 
is obsolete;  we now specify this with an output filename of '\-'.  But 
it is still supported for the time being for compatibility with older scripts.
.TP 12
\fB\-S \fIsffmt\fR
Force the input soundfile to be treated as the type specified by 
the keyword.  This only applies if the 
.MS sndf 3
library has been compiled to use run-time determination of soundfile 
type; otherwise this option is ignored.  When it is active, the 
available soundfile keywords are listed in the usage message:
.EX
sndrfmt --
.EE
but currently include "AIFF" (Mac/SGI), "NeXT" (Sun/NeXT *.au/*.snd), 
"MSWAVE" (Microsoft RIFF/WAVE), "NIST" (NIST/SPHERE) and "PCM" 
(raw data, format optionally controlled by PCMFORMAT environment 
string, see
.MS sndf 3
).
.TP 12
\fB\-T \fIsffmt\fR
Under the runtime-dynamic version of the soundfile library, forces 
the output soundfile to be treated as the type specified by 
the keyword (see the -S option above).  If not specified, the 
output soundfile type will match the input.
.TP 12
.B InputSoundFile
Source soundfile.  Specifying '\-' alone instructs the program to take 
input from standard input (i.e. a formatted soundfile coming in over 
a pipe).
.TP 12
.B OutputSoundFile
The resampled sound file is written to this name.  If not specified, 
the default is the same as the input, except with ".rs" inserted before
the file-type specifier.  If the input is stdin, the default is stdout. 
Specifying '\-' alone indicates that output data be written to standard 
output.
.SH NOTES
The program tries to ensure that the number of output samples is 
exactly as expected.  This is given by the formula
floor(inframes * ip / op), where ip and op are the integer step 
sizes found to approximate the resampling ratio as ip/op.  
This means that an odd-length input file downsampled by a factor 
of 2 will have (n-1)/2 output frames.  Earlier versions of 
sndrsmp used ceil instead of floor, but this was deemed a less 
good solution.
.SH BUGS
It would be nice if it designed more optimal filters than Hamming 
window sincs. 
.SH SEE ALSO
.MS snd 3 ,
.MS sndf 3 ,
.MS sndrfmt 1 ,
.MS sndcat 1 .
.SH AUTHOR
Dan Ellis, 
.B dpwe@icsi.berkeley.edu

